## password-generator-and-analyser

Duration of the project: 4 months <br>
Project Mentors: Akash Prasad, Ranjana Kambhammettu<br>
Team Members: Aryamaan Chaurasia, Kiran Seetharam, A D Mahit Nandan, Kunal Singh Rajpurohit

# Introduction
Project statement: To design a password generator and analyser that generates strong yet personalized passwords and analyses generated passwords or users’ passwords and indicate their security flaws.<br>

Inspiration: Passwords are very commonly used authentication systems due to their ease of implementation and other factors. However, it is important for a password to be strong in order for it to be effective. It is recommended to make passwords complicated with intricate patterns, however because of this users tend to forget passwords or repeat them, which again becomes a security issue. We found a paper that discusses personalized password generation, which generates passwords based on information that the user provides. This makes the password easier to remember, at the same time using an algorithm to make sure that the password generated is secure. We use this paper as our base paper to generate a strong yet easy-to-remember password.<br>

Background info: A lot of work has been done in the field. A prominent one is PassGAN, a novel approach replacing human-generated password rules with theory-grounded machine learning algorithms. It uses Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) to learn the distribution of real passwords from actual password leaks and generate high-quality password guesses. Another research focused on defining metrics to characterize password strength and using them to evaluate password-composition policies. There was also a paper that evaluated the security of 6 mnemonic strategy variants in a series of online studies. They applied the standard method of using guess numbers or similar metrics to compare the generated passwords, and also measured the frequencies of the most commonly chosen sentences and their resulting passwords. The conclusion was that differences in the exact instructions had a tremendous impact on the security level of the resulting passwords. With this paper as an inspiration, a research article describing an algorithm and testing it was published where secure and personalized passwords are generated with user inputs. The Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) maintains a standard awareness document for developers and web application security, called OWASP Top 10 representing a broad consensus about the most critical security risks to web applications.

# Method
For this project, we implemented the following steps:
1) A list of worst/weak passwords was web scraped on sites with compromised passwords (from real data breaches) using Python libraries like BeautifulSoup.
2) A clustering algorithm called Affinity Propagation was used to cluster similar weak passwords. A given password was then compared with each cluster centroid to check for similar patterns using cosine similarity that would lead to the password being weak.
3) Downloaded a list of compromised passwords (from real data breaches) and stored them in a MySQL database in order to ensure faster search. This is made sure  that an already breached password is not used ( to prevent credential stuffing attack). 
4) Implemented the algorithm from this paper (Strong Password Generation Based On User Inputs | IEEE Conference Publication) to generate passwords.
5) Made a browser extension that acts as a password analyser and generator:
a) Analyzer would analyze an already existing user password and ensure that it is not an already breached password and it does not fit in the criteria of weak passwords generated by the ML model.
b) Generator would use the algorithm from the research paper to generate personalized passwords and, for an additional layer of security, analyze the password (according to the conditions mentioned earlier), and make sure the password generated is indeed strong and safe, yet at the same time, personalized and easy to remember.
6) For the generator, tested the password generated against various attacks (as mentioned in the research paper) and made sure that there is a greater degree of security when this password generator is used.

# Results
1) We were able to create a website that generated passwords and analyzed them:
2) Using Password Meter, our Password Generator and Analyser achieved an average score of 97.78% compared to the base paper which had achieved a score of 94.88%.
3) Using Password Checker, we have achieved an average score of 88.36% using the sample inputs.
4) Using Strength Test, 62% of our sample input passwords have an entropy of more than 76 Entropy bits.

# Obstacles faced
To store the breached and compromised passwords, we tried using Tries but this data structure did not work out as we ran into storage and memory issues.
After successfully storing them in a MySQL database, we were not able to connect it to Pyodide and the python script that used to make the webpage.
Due to the same Pyodide issue, we were not able to make a chrome extension.
While converting the website into a Chrome Extension we faced a Content Security Policy
(CSP) issue which we were not able to pass through.

# Conclusion
In this project we learnt how to web scrape websites for breached and common passwords, how to implement a ML model using AffinityPropagation to generate clusters, how to import CSV files to MySQL database and host it to an online server, data analysis, basics of cybersecurity, especially related to common passwords attacks.

# Future work
We are looking for alternatives and possibilities in finding a solution for the obstacles which were, connecting the MySQL database to the python script that was used to make the webpage and also building the chrome extension which could not work due to the same Pyodide issue.
